+++
title = '2025-09-02: Introducing the Sentiero'
date = 2025-08-24T12:00:00+02:00
draft = false
[params]
  author = 'Magnus Nordlander'
+++
*Note: This isn't an actual product announcement. You can't buy the Sentiero.*

Coming in 2026, the Sentiero takes some of the best features from the very highest end espresso machines, and brings it to the solid foundation of the La Marzocco GS3. Handcrafted. By you.

The Sentiero leads your espresso machine down a path less travelled; where the journey is the destination. It allows you to both explore the art of making espresso, and the art of making espresso machines. In contrast to the fast-paced approach of many other machines, the Sentiero represents a slower, more deliberate approach to the entire espresso process.

Alan Kay once said that people who are really serious about software should make their own hardware. This was a reflection of his belief that breakthrough software innovation requires co-designing the entire system rather than working within existing hardware constraints. Similarly, we believe that in the journey towards the perfect espresso, if you have the skills to create software or hardware, you are going to want to be able to pull those levers to alter your process.

## Features

Built upon the La Marzocco GS3, the Sentiero already has superior thermal stability, plentiful steam power and commercial-grade build quality. The Sentiero makes its mark by adding even more 

* Versatile profiling
  * Using both a gear pump, and an integrated scale, the Sentiero allows you to execute shot routines based on PID controlled pressure or flow, with mass or time as the independent variable. You can even mix mass and time as independent variables in the same routine.
  * Routines can either be programmatically defined or, using our cloud hosted routine inference engine, created from a shot profile
  * Pulled an amazing shot and forgot to make it into a routine? No worries, take your time and enjoy the coffee. All shots are automatically logged to the on-board SD card, so you can always go back and make it a routine later.
* Back-pressure-based puck saturation
  * The Sentiero is designed to fill your headroom fast but gently. With pressure and flow sensors, the Sentiero knows exactly when your puck starts to exert backpressure, allowing you to transition to the next phase of brewing.
* A machine for the modern era
  * Featuring a beautiful high-resolution, high refresh rate color display, your shot profiles have never looked better.
* The sky is the limit for extensibility
  * The Sentiero features standardized connectors like QWIIC and EyeSPI, as well as Bluetooth 5 LE, allowing you to connect a plethora of peripherals
  * Examples include:
    * Connecting to an additional scale or grinder to automatically adjust routine parameters based on your dose and grind.
    * Sensor portafilters for automatic calibration of temperature and pressure.
* Connected. Yours forever.
  * The Sentiero features an open source Variegated Coffee controller. Built to be connected, but on your terms.
  * Integrate your machine with the Smart Home system of your choice.
  * Don't want to use a cloud? Fine by us. You can self-host the routine inference engine. It doesn't take much to host.

## Getting the Sentiero

The Sentiero is not a product you can purchase. In fact, the Sentiero is not a product at all. It's the end-goal of an espresso machine modding journey. Don't have a GS3? That's fine. You might not get to the same end-goal, and the path may different, but it *will* be rewarding.

We're a community of makers. We share schematics, PCB layouts, CAD files, example firmwares, and server components. All to make better espresso. All open-source. The rest is up to you.